\RequirePackage{fix-cm}
\documentclass[12pt,titlepage,openany]{book}

\input{tex/prelude.tex}

\title{\StarTrekFate{}}
\author{Chris Bouchard}
\date{\yyyymmdddate\today}

\pagenumbering{gobble}

\begin{document}

\begin{titlepage}
    \pdfbookmark{\StarTrekFate{}}{Title Page}
    \vspace*{0.6in}
    \begin{center}
        \includegraphics[height=2.5in]{img/CommBadge.eps}\\
        \vspace*{0.7in}
        {\startrek\fontsize{0.9in}{0.4in}\selectfont\thetitle}\\
    \end{center}
    \vspace*{\fill}

    \noindent
    \begin{tabular}{b{0.5\linewidth}>{\raggedleft}b{0.5\linewidth}}
        {\startrek\fontsize{0.4in}{0.3in}\selectfont\theauthor}
        \vspace{0.2in}\newline
        {\Huge\startrek\thedate}
        &
        \includegraphics[height=0.9in]{img/FateLight.eps}
        \hspace*{0.2in}
    \end{tabular}
\end{titlepage}

\cleardoublepage

\begin{center}
    \parbox{0.85\linewidth}{\input{tex/copyright.tex}}
\end{center}
\cleardoublepage

\pdfbookmark{Contents}{Contents}
\tableofcontents
\cleardoublepage

\pagenumbering{arabic}



\chapter{Introduction}\label{chap:intro}

\begin{center}
    \includegraphics[width=0.6\linewidth]{img/Enterprise.eps}\\
    \vspace{2ex}
    \textit{``Space: The final frontier. These are the voyages of the
    starship\ldots''}
\end{center}

\vspace{1em}

\noindent
\lettrine[lines=1]{W}{elcome} to \StarTrekFate{}, an adaptation of the
\FateCore{} system for the \StarTrek{} universe.

\section{What You Need to Play}

We assume that you have access to the \FateCore{} book, EHP0001 \textit{Fate
Core System}. This document simply describes the new rules and rules changes we
have made and clarifies some interactions. We will refer to page numbers in the
2013 hard-cover printing.

In addition to the materials described in the section What You Need to Play on
page~3 of the \FateCore{} book, we also recommend that you have access to
``official Federation records'' --- some reference for the \StarTrek{} setting
that your entire group agrees to follow. This document was created using Memory
Alpha,\footnote{Memory Alpha: \url{http://www.memory-alpha.org}} a public
\StarTrek{} wiki.

We occasionally make references to the \FateSystemToolkit{}, EHP0005. This book
is not required for play, but we have cherry-picked a few rules from the
toolkit and adapted them to our setting. When we do, we provide a reference to
this book for additional details. We will refer to page numbers in the 2013
eBook printing.

\section{Play Style}

The \FateCore{} system is designed for collaborative storytelling, and we
strongly encourage that in \StarTrekFate{}. We have not worked out rules
systems for every creature or piece of tech in Federation space. Rather, we
expect that players and GMs will work together to do what seems right. This
only works if players are ``good'' roleplayers, by which we mean focused on
characters and plot rather than stats and rules. The rules are certainly
important (which is why this document exists), but after all the fun of
\StarTrek{} is exploring the unknown!



\chapter{\StarTrek{} Life}\label{chap:life}

\begin{center}
    \includegraphics[width=0.5\linewidth]{img/Federation.eps}\\
    \vspace{2ex}
    \textit{``A dream that became a reality and spread throughout the
    stars.''\\ --- Captain James T. Kirk, 2269}
\end{center}

\noindent \lettrine[lines=1]{T}{he} assumed setting for \StarTrekFate{} is the
United Federation of Planets, or at least somewhere within the Alpha Quadrant.
This is the part of the galaxy explored in the majority of the \StarTrek{}
franchise. Your characters are likely Federation citizens, and if not they are
very familiar with it.

\section{Living in the Federation}

The big thing to remember about the Federation is that it is a utopian society.
It was founded on the principles of universal liberty, rights, and equality. In
this setting, things like poverty, huger, racism, and even currency have been
largely eradicated for hundreds of years.

This is not to say that your character or the society in which he or she lives
is perfect. The Federation is is still made up of people --- Humans, Vulcans,
Tellarites, and a multitude of other species, but still people. Poverty may be
a thing of the past, but politics can be as ugly and underhanded as ever.
Racism among Humans is considered old-fashioned, but the man on the street
probably has a thing or two to say about ``those Klingons''. The point is that
\StarTrek{} is always \emph{hopeful}. Of course things are not perfect, but
they can be fixed.

\section{Starfleet}

The main focus of \StarTrek{} has always been Starfleet, and this game is no
different. Starfleet is the deep-space exploratory and defense service of the
Federation, and it captures all the ideals of Federation society.

There are two ways your character could have joined Starfleet: enlisting or
receiving a commission. Enlisted personnel form the rank and file of Starfleet.
They keep the ships running. They're the security guards, transporter operators,
and medical technicians. Any enlisted rank is below that of a commissioned
officer, so even seasoned CPOs must refer to ensigns as ``sir'', however such
seasoned personnel would likely wield influence far beyond their place in the
rank structure due to their extensive experience and skill.

Receiving a commission means being authorized to hold an officer's rank, with
all the privileges and responsibilities that rank entails. Usually a
comissioned officer has graduated from Starfleet Academy and worked his or her
way up from the rank of Ensign. However, in times of conflict, or when contact
with Starfleet is not possible for extended periods, a temporary commission
could appoint persons to other ranks.

\section{Rank and Title}\label{sec:orders}

Different versions of \StarTrek{} have not consistently used the same ranks.
For this setting, we will be using the following set, listed from lowest rank
to highest:

\begin{multicols}{2}
    \raggedcolumns
    \paragraph{Enlisted Personnel:}
    \begin{itemize}
        \item Crewman (3rd--1st Class)
        \item Petty Officer (3rd--1st Class)
        \item Chief Petty Officer
        \item Senior Chief Petty Officer
        \item Master Chief Petty Officer
    \end{itemize}

    \columnbreak
    \paragraph{Junior Officers:}
    \begin{itemize}
        \item Ensign
        \item Lieutenant Junior Grade
        \item Lieutenant
    \end{itemize}

    \paragraph{Senior Officers:}
    \begin{itemize}
        \item Lieutenant Commander
        \item Commander
        \item Captain
    \end{itemize}
\end{multicols}

\noindent \emph{(Note that higher ranks do exist, but will not be available at
character creation.)}

\vspace{1em}

Starfleet officers and personnel give and obey orders on a daily basis. When
one character wishes to give an order to another, there are several ways the GM
can choose to resolve the situation depending on the situation and the
characters involved.

For most orders from a superior to a subordinate, no special action will be
needed. This is Starfleet, and your character is a trained professional.
Unless your character has a good reason, he or she should generally follow the
orders of superior officers without a fight.

Some orders, however, are simply unacceptable. Such orders may conflict with
one of your character's aspects, or they may be a violation of Starfleet
regulations. In this case, the GM has two options for resolution. He or she may
choose to compel your character's rank aspect, in which case refer to the
section \nameref{sec:aspects-orders} on page~\pageref{sec:aspects-orders}.
Otherwise, the order can be resolved using social combat --- or even physical
combat if it comes to it. This option should be saved as a last resort, since
it represents true insubordination.

Finally, for characters outside of Starfleet, the orders of an officer do not
have the same impact. In this case, social combat is the only appropriate way
for one character to command another.



\chapter{Aspects}\label{chap:aspects}

\lettrine[lines=1]{T}{he} \FateCore{} system uses aspects to help give
characters individuality and personality. In \StarTrekFate{}, will modify this
system slightly, adding an extra aspect and imposing some requirements. This
will reflect how big of a commitment being in Starfleet is for your character,
and how much it has shaped his or her life. This chapter details these
requirements.

\section{High Concept}\label{sec:high-concept}

Joining Starfleet is a major, life-changing decision. Thus, it should be
reflected in your character's high concept. For example, a chief engineer could
have the high concept \aspect{Starfleet Gearhead}. Of course, if your character
is not a member of Starfleet, this requirement does not apply to you, though
some other organization may fill this role for your character, such as a Vulcan
scientist with the high concept \aspect{Researcher of the Science Academy}.

\section{Species Aspect}\label{sec:species}

Your character's species is definitely a defining characteristic. The story of
\StarTrek{} is told from the Humans' perspective, so for better or for worse
that is the ``default'' species. A player may choose another species with GM
approval. For common species, especially species that are members of the
Federation, the GM should generally err on the side of allowing the choice.
Starfleet does not discriminate on the basis of species --- there have been
Klingon and even Ferengi officers. A non-Human character must have an aspect
reflecting his or her species, but it need not be the high concept.

Chosing a different species has additional requirements. See the chapter
\nameref{chap:species} on page~\pageref{chap:species} for more information.

\section{Rank Aspect}\label{sec:rank}

A character's position in Starfleet is a defining characteristic --- remember,
your character has devoted his or her life to joining and advancing within Star
Fleet. Your character has an extra aspect representing his or her rank. You may
invoke this aspect to draw on your character's experience and training, as well
as the respect his or her rank commands. Your rank aspect may be compelled to
force your character to act as his or her rank dictates, perhaps to follow
distasteful orders or to uphold the Prime Directive.

If your character is not a member of Starfleet, you may use this aspect to
denote your character's rank within some other similar organization, such as a
Romulan with the aspect \aspect{Centurion} or a Vulcan with the aspect
\aspect{High Priest}. If your character is not a member of any such
organization, your character should have the aspect \aspect{Civilian}.

\section{Aspects and Orders}\label{sec:aspects-orders}

Giving and obeying orders is part and parcel of having a rank, and thus it is
core to your Starfleet character. An order starts simply as two characters
talking. When a captain gives an order to an ensign, for example, this does not
necessarily create a compel. However, if the GM or the ensign's player feel the
order is unreasonable, the GM may choose to compel the ensign's rank aspect, at
which point the captain's and ensign's players and the GM work together to
determine how the compel will be fulfilled.

Note that the superior officer's player is not requesting a compel. It would be
unreasonable to expect a player to spend a fate point for every order his or
her character gives --- commanding officers would quickly lose control of the
ship. However, if the superior officer's player wishes to have control over
how the subordinate's rank aspect is compelled, or to compel a different
aspect, he or she will need to request a compel as usual.

\begin{example}
    Mary's character Captain Jennings orders Dr.\ Smith to wake a captured
    Romulan centurion for questioning. Dr.\ Smith, played by John, knows that
    this would likely kill the centurion. John says Dr.\ Smith would probably
    refuse that order, since it conflicts with his aspect \aspect{Do No Harm}.
    The GM decides to compel Dr.\ Smith's rank aspect \aspect{Commander} to
    obey the order, and suggests as a compromise that Dr.\ Smith could file an
    official complaint in the medical log. John accepts the fate point, and
    after strong protest Dr.\ Smith wakes the Romulan.
\end{example}

A compel on a character's rank aspect can be bought off (just like any other
compel) by spending a fate point. However, a character should have strong
reason for doing so, such as personal bias or finding an order to be downright
unacceptable.



\chapter{Skills}\label{chap:skills}

\lettrine[lines=1]{I}{n} \Fate{}, skills describe your character's abilities.
Every action you take in the game will be based on a skill, and each skill
covers a broad area of competency. It's a good idea to be familiar with the
section Defining Skills on page~86 of the \FateCore{} book, as well as the
default skill descriptions starting on page~96, before reading this chapter. As
much as possible, skills work the same in \StarTrekFate{} as they do in
\FateCore{}. However, the setting of \StarTrek{} is different enough that we
felt some changes were required.

We decided to change the way skills are chosen at character creation. Some
skills have been combined into new, broader skills; some skills have been
renamed and rethemed; and some brand new skills have been added. This chapter
details the changes in further detail.

For convenience, here is the complete skill list for \StarTrekFate{}. Skills
not described in \FateCore{} (i.e., renamed or new skills) have been bolded.

\begin{multicols}{3}
    \raggedcolumns
    \begin{itemize}
        \item \textbf{\skill{Academics}}
        \item \skill{Athletics}
        \item \textbf{\skill{Bureaucracy}}
        \item \skill{Burglary}
        \item \skill{Contacts}
        \item \skill{Deceive}
        \item \skill{Empathy}
        \item \textbf{\skill{Engineering}}
        \item \skill{Fight}
        \item \skill{Investigate}
        \item \textbf{\skill{Medicine}}
        \item \skill{Notice}
        \item \skill{Physique}
        \item \textbf{\skill{Pilot}}
        \item \textbf{\skill{Presence}}
        \item \skill{Resources}
        \item \skill{Shoot}
        \item \skill{Stealth}
        \item \textbf{\skill{Survival}}
        \item \skill{Will}
    \end{itemize}
\end{multicols}

\section{Skill Points}\label{sec:skill-points}

For character creation, we have decided to replace the skill pyramid described
in \FateCore{} in favor of a point-based system.\footnote{This system should be
familiar to players who have played the \textit{Dresden Files RPG}.} Characters
start with a pool of skill points and all skills at \AdjLevel{0}. Players then
spend skill points as described in the section Advancement and Change in the
\FateCore{} book on page~255. In the end, skills must still be arranged in
\emph{skill columns}, which means you may not have more skills at any given
rank than you have at the rank below.

The number of skill points given to new characters should be determined by the
GM when he or she designs the campaign. The \FateCore{} book recommends 20, but
we feel this may be too few to represent the amount of training Starfleet
officers and personnel have received. Somewhere between 20 and 30 points is
probably appropriate, based on the desired power-level.

You may not choose to bank skill points received during character creation as
you could skill points acquired at milestones. These skill points represent
a lifetime of experience and training.

\begin{example}
    The GM has allotted each player 25 skill points for character creation.
    John decides he wants to build a doctor. He knows that the \skill{Medicine}
    skill will be very important and takes that at \AdjLevel{4}. He wants his
    doctor to feel more at home in the lab than the field, so he picks
    \skill{Academics} as a second \AdjWord{4} skill. John now has 17 skill
    points remaining, and he fills in the remaining skills as follows:

    \begin{center}
        \begin{tabular}{rl}
            \AdjLevel{4} & \SkillBox{Academics}\SkillBox{Medicine}\\[5pt]
            \AdjLevel{3} & \SkillBox{Presence}\SkillBox{Will}\\[5pt]
            \AdjLevel{2} & \SkillBox{Empathy}\SkillBox{Investigate}%
                           \SkillBox{Notice}\\[5pt]
            \AdjLevel{1} & \SkillBox{Athletics}\SkillBox{\small Bureaucracy}%
                           \SkillBox{Contacts}\SkillBox{Deceive}\\[5pt]
                         & \SkillBox{Shoot}\\
        \end{tabular}
    \end{center}
\end{example}

\subsection*{A Note About the Ladder}

Ratings and die rolls in \Fate{} are rated on a ladder, given on page~9 of the
\FateCore{} book, from \AdjLevel{-2} to \AdjLevel{8}. It's important to keep
in mind your character's context when interpreting results. What's average for
the man on the street is not average for a Starfleet officer. It's up to the
players and the GM to keep this in mind when setting difficulties.

For example, any old person would probably have to roll \skill{Pilot} to take a
\Class{Constitution} starship out of spacedock without breaking something, but
your Starfleet navigator would probably not --- unless a party of Romulan
Warbirds were attacking the station at the time, or unless the GM compels your
\aspect{Admirals Make Me Nervous} aspect.

\section{Species Skills}\label{sec:species-skills}

If your character is a species other than Human, he or she has an additional
skill representing how in tune he or she is with his or her nature. Check out
the chapter \nameref{chap:species} on page~\pageref{chap:species} for more
information about this skill.

\section{\skill{Academics} [\skill{Lore}]}\label{sec:academics}

The \skill{Academics} skill represents your character's ability to know and
find information. Every Starfleet officer has graduated from Starfleet Academy,
so this skill is about more than simply doing well in school. It's about your
characters aptitude for learning and his or her depth of knowledge in esoteric
subjects. Since a great deal of research is done using AI these days, this is
also the skill for programming and using computers.

\section{\skill{Bureaucracy} [New Skill]}\label{sec:bureaucracy}

As technology advances, sentient lifeforms find new and exciting ways to expand
their bureaucracies. The Federation has citizens on thousands of planets, and
Starfleet must deal with a supply chain covering over five million cubic
parsecs. Add to that the fact that the Federation has been in existence for
some two hundred years and you can imagine the tangled web of regulatory bodies
that has grown.

To navigate this labyrinth of red tape, your character uses the
\skill{Bureaucracy} skill. This skill not only involves knowing the rules and
regulations, but also who to talk to and how to do it. It lets your character
get things done in organizations that feel as if they were designed to prevent
just that.

\begin{SkillActionList}
    \SkillActionEntry{O}{\skill{Bureaucracy} obstacles are about getting
    something done in a complex organization. They are about knowing obscure
    by-laws or regulatory minutiae, as well as the people and committees
    involved.}

    \SkillActionEntry{C}{A character can create an advantage using
    \skill{Bureaucracy} by using the rules to his or her advantage. An example
    could be citing an obscure Starfleet bylaw to win an argument.}

    \SkillActionEntry{A}{\skill{Bureaucracy} is not used as an attack.}

    \SkillActionEntry{D}{You can use \skill{Bureaucracy} to defend against
    other actions dealing with the same organization. Usually these will be
    other \skill{Bureaucracy} actions, but also possibly \skill{Contacts} or
    \skill{Resources} actions.}
\end{SkillActionList}

\section{\skill{Engineering} [\skill{Crafts}]}\label{sec:engineering}

\skill{Engineering} is your character's ability to design, build, repair, and
otherwise work with technology. Your character does not necessarily know all
the theory behind warp drive (that would be \skill{Academics}), but he or she
sure as hell knows how to fix one threatening to breach.

The \skill{Engineering} skill lets your character interact with the ship in a
unique way. While other characters can control the ship from their posts, your
character can get into the ship's internals and make changes or repairs. He or
she can ``heal'' the ship in much the same way a doctor would heal a biological
character.

\section{\skill{Medicine} [New Skill]}\label{sec:medicine}

\begin{wrapfigure}{r}{0.35\linewidth}
    \vspace{-2em}
    \centering
    \includegraphics[width=0.8\linewidth]{img/Medicine.eps}\\
    \vspace{2ex}
    \footnotesize A doctor treating a patient with a hypospray
\end{wrapfigure}

Medicine in the 23rd and 24th centuries is a lot more complicated than it used
to be. Doctors now need to understand how cells work on a sub-molecular level,
as well as how to use all the technology in a modern sickbay --- not to mention
the physiology of dozens of different species.

Characters can use \skill{Medicine} to heal others using the wide array of
technology available. Things that used to take a long time to heal, such as
broken bones, can now be corrected all but instantly. Conditions that used to
be fatal are now unpleasant complications. This is not to say that characters
are immortal, just that the line between minor and life-threatening injuries
has shifted.

The \skill{Medicine} skill assumes access to a modern sickbay. Working in the
field is more difficult, with distractions abundant and equipment limited. The
available sickbay is rated\footnote{There is no actual system in place for
modifying \skill{Medicine} actions based on the rating of the available
sickbay. It is currently left up to GM discression.} using the adjective
ladder, with a starship sickbay being Good. Unless otherwise noted, it is
always assumed that a doctor has basic tools such as a medical tricorder.

\begin{SkillActionList}
    \SkillActionEntry{O}{\skill{Medicine} is the skill for recovering from
    physical consequences (such a skill does not explicitly exist in
    \FateCore{}). See Recovering from a Consequence on page~164 of the
    \FateCore{} book. Depending on the nature of the consequence and the
    available sickbay, the GM may decide that the consequence should be
    downgraded rather than just renamed. This is a judgement call. A
    consequence should never be downgraded by more than one step.

    \skill{Medicine} can also be used to identify diseases and other medical
    conditions. Again, the GM should take into account the available sickbay
    when deciding on the level of opposition.}

    \SkillActionEntry{C}{Use \skill{Medicine} to practice ``preventative
    medicine,'' giving a character an aspect representing some sort of medican
    protection. Before an away mission, a doctor may prepare a hypospray that
    gives the aspect \aspect{Inoculated for Andorian Shingles}, or perhaps
    \aspect{Oxygenated Blood} if a character will have to survive in a
    high-altitude environment.}

    \SkillActionEntry{A}{\skill{Medicine} is not really used as an attack. The
    GM may wish to use \skill{Medicine} as an attack skill to fight some sort
    of sentient virus, but that would be rare.}

    \SkillActionEntry{D}{Similarly, \skill{Medicine} is not used to defend.
    \skill{Medicine} is either used before the injury would be inflicted or
    after. It is difficult to imagine a doctor operating on a patient
    \emph{while} an injury is sustained.}
\end{SkillActionList}

\section{\skill{Pilot} [\skill{Drive}]}\label{sec:pilot}

\skill{Pilot} is the skill of maneuvering starships, shuttles, or any other
vehicles. It includes proficiency with modern astrogation technology and star
maps. This skill subsumes the \skill{Drive} skill from \FateCore{}.

\begin{SkillActionList}
    \SkillActionEntry{O}{Use the \skill{Pilot} skill to plot courses, perform
    maneuvers, know the locations of star systems, or anything else related to
    navigating the galaxy or controlling a ship.}

    \SkillActionEntry{C}{Creating an advantage with \skill{Pilot} involves
    flying the ship in such a way to confuse enemies or gain a tactical
    advantage. A conn officer may use \skill{Pilot} to place the aspect
    \aspect{Hidden in a Nebula} on the ship to escape detection, or perhaps the
    aspect \aspect{Attack Pattern Delta} when entering a battle.}

    \SkillActionEntry{A}{\skill{Pilot}, like \skill{Drive}, is generally not
    used as an attack skill. \FateCore{} suggests that one could use
    \skill{Drive} to attack by ramming. However, ramming something with a
    starship is very different from ramming something with an automobile and
    likely should not be handled as a conflict, but rather by placing new
    aspects on the scene.}

    \SkillActionEntry{D}{Evading attacking ships is the most common defensive
    use of \skill{Pilot}. Like \skill{Drive}, \skill{Pilot} can also be used to
    defend against advantages being created by, or overcome actions of, other
    ships.}
\end{SkillActionList}

\section{\skill{Presence} [\skill{Provoke} and \skill{Rapport}]}\label{sec:presence}

The \skill{Rapport} and \skill{Provoke} skills from \FateCore{} have been
combined into a single skill called \skill{Presence}, which represents a
character's force of personality. In our system, \skill{Presence} is roughly
the mental analog of \skill{Fight}, while \skill{Empathy}, used to read other
character's thoughts and emotions, is the mental analog of \skill{Notice}.
\skill{Presence} is an active skill, used to affect other characters in some
way.

There is still a certain degree of overlap between \skill{Empathy} and
\skill{Presence}, since it can be difficult to move people if one cannot read
them. Similarly, though, it is difficult to be an effective fighter if one is
blind. There may be times when both skills are relevant to an action, though
the GM may decide that one would face a higher level of opposition.

\begin{SkillActionList}
    \SkillActionEntry{O}{You can use your \skill{Presence} to simply make
    weak-willed (or unimportant) people do or think what you want, whether by
    charm or by intimidation. As with \skill{Provoke} in \FateCore{}, this will
    require a contest against PCs or important NPCs.}

    \SkillActionEntry{C}{To be written.}

    \SkillActionEntry{A}{\skill{Presence} can be used as an attack in mental
    combat, just like the \skill{Provoke} skill in \FateCore{}.}

    \SkillActionEntry{D}{Having a powerful \skill{Presence} does not make
    others' mental attacks hurt any less. \skill{Will} is the mental defence
    skill, or possibly \skill{Empathy}.}
\end{SkillActionList}

\section{\skill{Survival} [New Skill]}\label{sec:survival}

The \skill{Survival} skill is about surviving in rugged conditions --- anywhere
that an average person would not be able to live without training. It could be
used to control one's breathing in a low-oxygen environment, set up camp for an
away mission gone wrong, or follow tracks through wilderness.

\begin{SkillActionList}
    \SkillActionEntry{O}{To be written.}

    \SkillActionEntry{C}{To be written.}

    \SkillActionEntry{A}{\skill{Survival} is not generally used in conflicts.}

    \SkillActionEntry{D}{\skill{Survival} is not used to defend against
    actions. \skill{Survival} is about a character versus the environment.}
\end{SkillActionList}

\section{A Note about \skill{Resources}}\label{sec:note-resources}

For most Federation citizens, money and wealth are relics of a sad past.
However, not all species are so ``enlightened'', and sometimes it helps to have
the resources on hand to trade with them. If your character has access to
above\-/average wealth, it can be reflected in the \skill{Resources} skill. Any
character in Starfleet with a \skill{Resources} score should have a reason for
it in his or her backstory. Also be aware that \skill{Resources} is not very
helpful unless you are in a place where money has value.



\chapter{Stunts and Refresh}\label{chap:stunts}

\lettrine[lines=1]{O}{nce} you have an idea of your character through aspects
and skills, you can further personalize your character through stunts. Stunts,
like aspects, are created for your character personally, and they describe,
essentially, how your character gets to break the rules. It's probably a good
idea to be familiar with the sections Defining Stunts and Building Stunts
starting on page~87 of the \FateCore{} book before reading this chapter.

\section{Building a Character}\label{sec:building}

Each character in \StarTrekFate{} gets three free stunts and four refresh. You
may spend up to three of that refresh to buy additional stunts. Note that these
numbers are different from the numbers in \FateCore{}.

If your character is a species other than Human, one of his or her stunts
\emph{must} be tied to his or her racial skill. See the \nameref{chap:species}
chapter on page~\pageref{chap:species} for more information about species
skills and stunts.

\section{Expanding the Definition of a Stunt}\label{sec:aspect-stunts}

Stunts in \FateCore{} must be tied to a particular skill, and provide bonuses
or alternate trappings for that skill. In \StarTrekFate{}, we've decided to be
looser about what a stunt can do. We will follow the suggestions in the section
New Stunt Rubrics on page~34 of the \FateSystemToolkit{}. We won't reproduce
the entire section here (ask your GM for a copy if you don't have one), but we
will summarize the main ideas:

\begin{itemize}
    \item \textbf{Flexible Stunts} allow ``\ldots{} your stunts to be
        skill-agnostic, or tied to multiple skills, or tied to something else
        entirely different, like an aspect or piece of gear or a stress
        track''.

    \item \textbf{Aspected Stunts} are stunts tied to aspects:
        \begin{quote}
            For stunts which are tied to aspects, you might view some of their
            effects as narrowly defined free invocations. Other aspected stunts
            might require an invocation \ldots{} but give something extra or
            particularly unusual when the aspect is invoked. Such effects
            should be more potent than a ``vanilla'' invocation. You could even
            design a stunt that triggers under particular kinds of
            compels---just be careful you don’t end up neutering the downside
            with the resulting benefit.
        \end{quote}

    \item \textbf{Triggered Effects} ``create stunts that trigger under a
        specific narrative condition, require a skill roll, and have a specific
        effect as a result.''
\end{itemize}

\noindent
The main point is to be creative and work with your GM to come up with
interesting stunts.

\section{\skill{Academics} Stunts}\label{sec:academics-stunts}

\begin{itemize}
    \item \stunt{Computer Wizard.} +2 to \skill{Academics} rolls made to
        manipulate computers.
    \item \stunt{Technobabble.} You can use \skill{Academics} in place of
        \skill{Deceive} when attempting to confuse someone with dense technical
        jargon.
\end{itemize}

\section{\skill{Bureaucracy} Stunts}\label{sec:bureaucracy-stunts}

\begin{itemize}
    \item \stunt{Work the System.} You may use \skill{Bureaucracy} in place of
        \skill{Contacts} when dealing with a large bureaucratic organization.
\end{itemize}

\section{\skill{Engineering} Stunts}\label{sub:engineering-stunts}

To be written.

\section{\skill{Medicine} Stunts}\label{sec:medicine-stunts}

\begin{itemize}
    \item \stunt{Infection Specialist.} +2 to overcome actions with
        \skill{Medicine} when diagnosing or treating an infection.

    \item \stunt{Field Medic.} If the available sickbay is Fair or lower, treat
        it as one step higher when making \skill{Medicine} rolls.

    \item \stunt{Walking Tricorder.} You can use \skill{Medicine} in place of
        \skill{Empathy} or \skill{Notice} to assess aspects of other characters
        if the aspect would be discovered in a medical examination.
\end{itemize}

\section{\skill{Pilot} Stunts}\label{sec:pilot-stunts}

\begin{itemize}
    \item \stunt{Trick Flyer.} When you succeed with style on a defend action
        with \skill{Pilot} and choose to reduce the result by one to gain a
        boost, you automatically perform a tricky maneuver to outrun or
        outflank your opponent. You gain a full situation aspect with a free
        invocation instead.
\end{itemize}

\section{\skill{Presence} Stunts}\label{sec:presence-stunts}

To be written.

\section{\skill{Survival} Stunts}\label{sec:survival-stunts}

To be written.



\chapter{Alien Species}\label{chap:species}

\begin{center}
    \includegraphics[width=0.4\linewidth]{img/AlienSpecies.eps}
\end{center}

\lettrine[lines=1]{W}{e} have adapted the rules for races from Professions and
Races section on page~40 of the \FateSystemToolkit{}. Each species has a
special skill, representing how in tune the character is with his or her
nature. Characters with a low rating in their species skill were probably not
raised in their species' culture, or perhaps are of mixed heratage. Characters
with a high rating have very potent blood (if their species has blood) and are
perfect specimens of their species.

Your character may (and probably should) take stunts tied to his or her species
skill. We give some examples of stunts below for some common species, but these
are just suggestions. Feel free to invent your own.

\section{Vulcans}\label{sec:vulcans}

Characters use the \skill{Vulcan} skill to apply logic, know Vulcan history,
and perform feats of strength.

\subsection*{\skill{Vulcan} Stunts}\label{subsec:vulcan-powers}

\begin{itemize}
    \item \stunt{Mind Meld.} You can enter into a telepathic link with another
        creature. If the subject is not willing, make an overcome action with
        the \skill{Vulcan} skill, which the subject defends with either
        \skill{Vulcan} or \skill{Will}. If the action fails, the meld does not
        take place.

    \item \stunt{Neck Pinch.} When you are able to touch another creature
        (either by surprise or landing a blow), you may spend a fate point to
        initiate a neck pinch. If you landed a physical attack, it deals no
        stress. Instead, you make a mental attack using your \skill{Vulcan}
        skill with a +2 bonus.

    \item \stunt{Trained Mind.} Due to your strict training, you may use
        \skill{Vulcan} instead of \skill{Will} to determine your mental stress
        and consequences, and you get one additional mild mental consequence.
\end{itemize}

\section{Betazoids}\label{sec:betazoids}

Characters use the \skill{Betazoid} skill to sense and project thoughts and
emotions and to be familiar with Betazoid culture.

\subsection*{\skill{Betazoid} Stunts}\label{subsec:betazoid-powers}

\begin{itemize}
    \item \stunt{Empathic Sense.} You may use the \skill{Betazoid} skill in
        place of \skill{Empathy} to read others' emotions, and you get a +2
        bonus when doing so. Your empathic senses are not hampered by most
        physical obstructions.

    \item \stunt{Telepathic Projection.} You can project your thoughts into the
        mind of another creature, or for a fate point place a fully formed
        thought into the subject's mind. You attempt to create an advantage
        with the \skill{Betazoid} skill, which the subject may defend with
        \skill{Betazoid} or \skill{Will}. If you succeed, you place an aspect
        on the target related to the thoughts you projected.

    \item \stunt{Total Awareness.} You can use \skill{Betazoid} in place of
        \skill{Notice} to be aware of nearby sentient creatures. You get a +2
        bonus when determining turn order, since you can sense your enemies'
        malice.
\end{itemize}



\chapter{Starships}\label{chap:starships}

\begin{center}
    \includegraphics[width=0.8\linewidth]{img/ConstitutionClass.eps}
\end{center}

\lettrine[lines=1]{A}{ny} captain will tell you that his or her ship is as much
a person as any other member of the crew. Ships seem to have personalities,
temperments, and even character flaws. A Vulcan might say this is simply ``the
illogical Human tendency to project feelings onto inanimate objects'', but that
does not stop the captain from urging the ship on when things get rough.

\section{Ship Aspects}\label{sec:ship-aspects}

The ship has aspects just like any other character, but there are some
differences. The ship does not have fate points, so its aspects cannot be
\emph{directly} invoked or compelled. Instead, its aspects are treated as
environment aspects when appropriate, and can be invoked by players whose
characters are interacting with the ship. The other difference is that instead
of a rank aspect it has a class aspect, such as \aspect{Constitution-Class}.

Some areas of the ship may have aspects of their own, such as a crew member's
quarters with the aspect \aspect{Meticulously Clean}. Also, areas or the ship
as a whole may gain aspects as a result of combat or plot, like a corridor
gaining the aspect \aspect{Pitch Black} when the power goes out.

\section{Ship Skills}\label{sec:ship-skills}

Just like player characters, not all ships are the same. Some are fast, some
have impressive firepower, and some have cloaking devices. Your ship will have
skills from the following list:

\begin{multicols}{3}
    \raggedcolumns
    \begin{itemize}
        \item \skill{Computers}
        \item \skill{Engines}
        \item \skill{Maneuver}
        \item \skill{Security}
        \item \skill{Sensors}
        \item \skill{Shields}
        \item \skill{Stealth}
        \item \skill{Structure}
        \item \skill{Weapons}
    \end{itemize}
\end{multicols}

\begin{wrapfigure}{l}{0.4\linewidth}
    \centering
    \includegraphics[width=0.8\linewidth]{img/StarshipPlanet.eps}\\
\end{wrapfigure}

The GM will set the number of skill points for the ship at character creation.
Since there are fewer skills for ships, the number should be lower than for
player characters.

There are two ways to assign skills for a ship. The GM may let the players
design the ship from the ground up, including skills. Otherwise, the GM should
let the players pick a ship type, then assign the points him- or herself. In
the latter case, the GM should still keep the players involved as much as
possible --- as always, the goal should be to have fun.

Ship skills are rolled by the GM to see how the ship performs independently of
whoever is controlling it. For example, the ship's sensors only reach so far,
regardless of who is using them (though players can do things to help by
gaining advantages). Since the players aren't rolling, the GM should make sure
to keep things interesting with good description, and let the players interact
with the ship.

\begin{example}
    The \emph{USS Concord} is in hot pursuit of an escaping Ferengi pirate
    ship. Since there isn't a pilot in the group, the GM decides to resolve the
    chase as an \skill{Engines} contest. The GM rolls \skill{Engines} checks
    for both ships --- the \emph{Concord} at \AdjLevel{2} and the Ferengi ship
    at \AdjLevel{0}. The Ferengi had previously damaged the \emph{Concord's}
    warp drive, and the GM invokes the consequence \aspect{Fluxuating Warp
    Field}. The \emph{Concord} rolls an \AdjLevel{1} and the Ferengi wind up
    with a \AdjLevel{3}. The GM informs the group that the Ferengi are getting
    away.

    Mary's character Cpt. Jennings calls down to Engineering and orders them to
    ``get the lead out''. Engineer Jim, played by Tom, responds that he's
    ``givin' her all she's got!'', and Tom rolls \skill{Engineering} to
    recallibrate the dilithium matrix and place the aspect \aspect{Well-Tuned
    Engine} on the ship. On the next \skill{Engines} check, Mary invokes the
    aspect and the GM rolls the checks. This time the \emph{Concord} gets a
    \AdjLevel{6} and the Ferengi a \AdjLevel{-1}. The GM declares that the
    \emph{Concord} caught back up as the Ferengi ship begins to over-heat.
\end{example}

In some cases, a player is actively controlling the ship, such as a pilot at
the helm or a science officer using the sensors. For this case, see the
following section on \nameref{sec:control-ship}.

\section{Ship Stress Tracks and Consequences}\label{sec:ship-stress}

\begin{wrapfigure}{r}{0.4\linewidth}
    \centering
    \includegraphics[width=0.9\linewidth]{img/Borg.eps}\\
\end{wrapfigure}

The ship's skills also determine its stress tracks. The ship has two stress
tracks: Shield Strength (determined by the \skill{Shields} skill) and
Structural Integrity (determined by the \skill{Structure} skill). Both stress
tracks start with two boxes. If the related skill is \AdjLevel{1} or
\AdjLevel{2}, add one box (for a total of three). If the skill is \AdjLevel{3}
or higher, add two boxes (for a total of four). If the skill is \AdjLevel{5},
the ship also gets an extra mild consequence.

When the ship takes stress, it is marked on the two stress tracks as follows.
If the shields are active, the stress is marked on the Shield Strength track if
possible. If the shields are active but there is no available box, the shields
buckle and deactivate until they can be repaired. If the shields are inactive,
stress is marked on the Structural Integrity track. If there is no available
box on this track, the ship must either take a consequence or be taken out.

Consequences for the ship reflect big hits that cause lasting damage, and the
crew may get tossed around. When the ship takes a consequence, characters in
affected areas must defend against a physical attack of a number of shifts
equal to the consequence taken --- 2 shifts for a mild consequence, 4 shifts
for a moderate consequence, or 6 shifts for a severe consequence. Athletics or
Physique would be appropriate skills to defend against this attack.

\section{Controlling the Ship}\label{sec:control-ship}

While the ship is sometimes treated as a character, it is still controlled by
its crew. Players may take actions that control the ship, such as a conn
officer changing course or an engineer repairing the warp engines. When
controlling the ship, a player rolls his or her character's relevant skill as
normal, but the result affects the ship rather than the character. In addition,
when controlling the ship, the player can invoke aspects of the ship as well as
those of his or her character.



\chapter{Technology}\label{chap:technology}

\begin{center}
    \raisebox{1.5em}{\includegraphics[height=1.5in,width=1.5in,keepaspectratio]{img/Phaser2.eps}}
    \hspace*{1em}
    \raisebox{0em}{\includegraphics[height=1.5in,width=1.5in,keepaspectratio]{img/Communicator.eps}}
    \hspace*{1em}
    \raisebox{1em}{\includegraphics[height=1.5in,width=1.5in,keepaspectratio]{img/Tricorder.eps}}
\end{center}

\lettrine[lines=1]{T}{here} is an abundance of technology in the \StarTrek{}
universe. Every citizen of the Federation has access to ``basic'' technology
like replicators and subspace communicators, and Starfleet makes sure its
personnel are equipped with only the latest and greatest.

As much as possible, \StarTrekFate{} tries not to introduce specialized rules
for each piece of technology --- not only would this be a futile effort, it
would be completely opposed to the \Fate{} philosophy. Characters are assumed
to have whetever equipment they need to perform their jobs. There are some
sorts of technology, however, that we feel warrant some specific rules, which
we describe in this chapter.

\section{Phasers}\label{sec:phasers}

\begin{wrapfigure}{r}{0.29\linewidth}
    \vspace{-3em}
    \centering
    \includegraphics[width=0.8\linewidth]{img/Phaser.eps}\\
    \vspace{2ex}
    \footnotesize A type-2 hand phaser, ca.\ 2260
\end{wrapfigure}

The standard directed energy weapon of the 23rd and 24th centuries is the
phaser. A phaser fires a nadion particle beam and is as useful a tool as it is
a weapon. Phasers come in a wide variety of shapes and sizes, from small,
handheld devices to massive cannons mounted on starships. Every Starfleet
officer is issued a phaser pistol as their sidearm, and no one graduates the
academy without extensive training in its use and maintenence.

Firing a phaser (unsurprisingly) uses the \skill{Shoot} skill. Phasers have a
multitude of settings, variously described by levels or fractions. Settings are
not described consistently in the various \StarTrek{} shows, so use whatever
description feels right --- as far as this game is concerned, the two modes are
\emph{stun} and \emph{kill}. In stun mode, the defending character may choose
to treat the attack as either physical or mental and defend appropriately
(e.g., \skill{Athletics} to dodge and dive, or \skill{Will} to resist the
stunning effect). In kill mode, the attack is only ever physical. Any
consequences taken should reflect the phaser's setting, as should the
conditions for being taken out by a hit.

\end{document}

